SKILL.md, before:

---
name: xtool-ios-build
description: Build and deploy iOS apps with xtool in SwiftPM-based projects, including setup, project structure, and troubleshooting.
license: MIT
compatibility: opencode
metadata:
  audience: ios-developers
  workflow: cli
---

# xtool iOS Build Skill

## What this skill does

- Guides setup for xtool on Linux/WSL and macOS.
- Provides a repeatable compile/build/install workflow for iOS apps.
- Documents required project structure (`Package.swift` + `xtool.yml`).
- Covers `xtool.yml` controls for bundle metadata, resources, icons, and entitlements.
- Includes common failure modes and concrete recovery steps.

## When to use

Use this skill when you need to compile, package, sign, and install an iOS app using `xtool` in a SwiftPM-based project.

## Preconditions

- You have a SwiftPM iOS app project (or will create one with `xtool new`).
- You have a physical iOS device connected for install/test flow.
- You can authenticate to Apple services during `xtool setup`.

## Setup

### Linux / WSL

1. Install Swift 6.2 and verify:

```bash
swift --version
```

2. Install USB plumbing:

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install usbmuxd
```

Optional diagnostics:

```bash
sudo apt install libimobiledevice-utils
ideviceinfo
```

3. Download `Xcode.xip` from Apple Developer downloads in a browser.
4. Install xtool and verify:

```bash
xtool --help
```

5. Run initial setup:

```bash
xtool setup
```

6. Verify iOS Swift SDK installation:

```bash
swift sdk list
```

### macOS

1. Install Xcode.
2. Verify iOS SDK path:

```bash
xcrun -sdk iphoneos -show-sdk-path
```

3. Install xtool and verify:

```bash
xtool --help
```

4. Run setup:

```bash
xtool setup
```

## Authentication mode guidance

- Prefer **API Key** mode when enrolled in paid Apple Developer Program (recommended by docs).
- Use **Password** mode if API Key is not available.

## Standard build workflow

### 1) Create or open project

Create a fresh project:

```bash
xtool new Hello
cd Hello
```

Generated files include:

- `Package.swift`
- `xtool.yml`
- `.sourcekit-lsp/config.json`

### 2) Build and install to connected device

```bash
xtool dev
```

What `xtool dev` handles:

- Build using SwiftPM iOS cross-compilation.
- Provision/sign package.
- Install app to connected iPhone.

Note: first run can be significantly slower due to cold module compilation; subsequent runs are faster with cache reuse.

Useful `xtool dev` parameters:

- `-c, --configuration <debug|release>`: build configuration (default: `debug`).
- `-u, --udid <udid>`: target a specific device.
- `--usb | --network | --all`: device discovery scope (default: `--all`).

Examples:

```bash
# Build release and deploy to one device
xtool dev run --configuration release --udid <DEVICE_UDID> --usb

# Deploy using network-discovered devices
xtool dev run --network
```

### 3) Iterate

- Edit code.
- Re-run `xtool dev`.
- Validate behavior on device.

## Required project structure

At minimum:

- SwiftPM manifest: `Package.swift`
- xtool control file: `xtool.yml`

Minimal `xtool.yml`:

```yaml
version: 1
bundleID: com.example.Hello
```

## `xtool.yml` controls

- `bundleID`: base app bundle identifier.
- `infoPath`: merge/override selected `Info.plist` keys.
- `resources`: copy files into app bundle root.
- `iconPath`: app icon path (PNG, ideally 1024x1024).
- `entitlementsPath`: entitlements plist path.

Example:

```yaml
version: 1
bundleID: com.example.Hello
infoPath: App-Info.plist
iconPath: Icon.png
resources:
  - GoogleServices-Info.plist
entitlementsPath: App.entitlements
```

## App Extensions workflow

For widget/extensions, define main product and extension products in `xtool.yml`:

```yaml
version: 1
bundleID: com.example.Hello
product: Hello
extensions:
  - product: HelloWidget
    infoPath: HelloWidget-Info.plist
```

## CLI parameters reference

Top-level subcommands (`xtool --help`):

- Configuration: `setup`, `auth`, `sdk`
- Development: `new`, `dev`, `ds`
- Device: `devices`, `install`, `uninstall`, `launch`

### `xtool new`

- Usage: `xtool new [<name>] [--skip-setup]`
- `<name>`: project name.
- `--skip-setup`: skip automatic `xtool setup` before project generation.

### `xtool setup`

- Usage: `xtool setup`
- Runs auth + SDK setup workflow (equivalent to `xtool auth && xtool sdk`).

### `xtool auth login`

- Usage: `xtool auth login [--username <username>] [--password <password>] [--mode <key|password>]`
- `-u, --username`: Apple ID.
- `-p, --password`: password for password mode.
- `-m, --mode <key|password>`: authentication mode.

### `xtool sdk install`

- Usage: `xtool sdk install <path>`
- `<path>`: path to `Xcode.xip` or `Xcode.app`.

### `xtool devices`

- Usage: `xtool devices [--usb] [--network] [--all] [--wait] [--no-wait]`
- `--usb | --network | --all`: connection search mode (default: `--all`).
- `--wait | --no-wait`: wait for a device if none is found (default: `--wait`).

### `xtool install`

- Usage: `xtool install [--udid <udid>] [--usb] [--network] [--all] <path>`
- `<path>`: local app/ipa path.
- `-u, --udid`: install to a specific device.

### `xtool uninstall`

- Usage: `xtool uninstall [--udid <udid>] [--usb] [--network] [--all] <bundle-id>`
- `<bundle-id>`: app identifier to remove.

### `xtool launch`

- Usage: `xtool launch [--udid <udid>] [--usb] [--network] [--all] <bundle-id> [<arg> ...]`
- `<bundle-id>`: app identifier to launch.
- `[<arg> ...]`: launch arguments passed to the app.

### Global options

- `--version`: print version.
- `-h, --help`: show help.

## Troubleshooting checklist

- Device trust prompt appeared and install failed:
  - Accept trust on device, then rerun `xtool dev`.
- Developer Mode disabled:
  - Enable Developer Mode on iOS device and retry.
- "Untrusted Developer" on launch:
  - Trust profile in iOS Settings, then relaunch app.
- Device not detected in Linux/WSL:
  - Confirm USB passthrough/binding and run `ideviceinfo`.
- Entitlements not applied:
  - Verify capability support and account limitations.

## Build output inspection

After build/install, inspect packaged app in:

- `./xtool/<AppName>.app`

Use this to verify merged `Info.plist`, copied resources, and expected bundle contents.

## References

- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/
- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/installation-linux/
- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/installation-macos/
- https://xtool.sh/tutorials/xtool/first-app/
- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/control/
- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/appex/
- Local runtime help output from:
  - `xtool --help`
  - `xtool dev --help`
  - `xtool setup --help`
  - `xtool new --help`
  - `xtool auth --help`
  - `xtool sdk --help`
  - `xtool devices --help`
  - `xtool install --help`
  - `xtool uninstall --help`
  - `xtool launch --help`

Commit message:

Update xtool setup install sources for Linux and macOS
Clarify that Linux should install the latest AppImage from GitHub Releases and that macOS should prefer Homebrew with a manual .app fallback. This keeps setup instructions aligned with current upstream distribution guidance.

SKILL.md, after:

---
name: xtool-ios-build
description: Build and deploy iOS apps with xtool in SwiftPM-based projects, including setup, project structure, and troubleshooting.
license: MIT
compatibility: opencode
metadata:
  audience: ios-developers
  workflow: cli
---

# xtool iOS Build Skill

## What this skill does

- Guides setup for xtool on Linux/WSL and macOS.
- Provides a repeatable compile/build/install workflow for iOS apps.
- Documents required project structure (`Package.swift` + `xtool.yml`).
- Covers `xtool.yml` controls for bundle metadata, resources, icons, and entitlements.
- Includes common failure modes and concrete recovery steps.

## When to use

Use this skill when you need to compile, package, sign, and install an iOS app using `xtool` in a SwiftPM-based project.

## Preconditions

- You have a SwiftPM iOS app project (or will create one with `xtool new`).
- You have a physical iOS device connected for install/test flow.
- You can authenticate to Apple services during `xtool setup`.

## Setup

### Linux / WSL

1. Install Swift 6.2 and verify:

```bash
swift --version
```

2. Install USB plumbing:

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install usbmuxd
```

Optional diagnostics:

```bash
sudo apt install libimobiledevice-utils
ideviceinfo
```

3. Download `Xcode.xip` from Apple Developer downloads in a browser.
4. Download latest `xtool` AppImage for your architecture, rename it to `xtool`, add it to your `PATH`, and verify:

   - Releases page: https://github.com/xtool-org/xtool/releases

```bash
curl -fL \
  "https://github.com/xtool-org/xtool/releases/latest/download/xtool-$(uname -m).AppImage" \
  -o xtool
chmod +x xtool
sudo mv xtool /usr/local/bin/

xtool --help
# OVERVIEW: Cross-platform Xcode replacement
```

5. Run initial setup:

```bash
xtool setup
```

6. Verify iOS Swift SDK installation:

```bash
swift sdk list
```

### macOS

1. Install Xcode.
2. Verify iOS SDK path:

```bash
xcrun -sdk iphoneos -show-sdk-path
```

3. Install `xtool`:

   - If you have Homebrew (recommended):

```bash
brew install xtool-org/tap/xtool
```

   - Otherwise, download `xtool.app` from the latest GitHub release, move it to `/Applications`, launch it, and run the suggested script to add `xtool` to your `PATH`.
     - Releases page: https://github.com/xtool-org/xtool/releases

4. Confirm installation:

```bash
xtool --help
# OVERVIEW: Cross-platform Xcode replacement
```

Note: Manual installs require checking GitHub releases and updating yourself. Auto-updates via Sparkle are tracked in issue #34.

5. Run setup:

```bash
xtool setup
```

## Authentication mode guidance

- Prefer **API Key** mode when enrolled in paid Apple Developer Program (recommended by docs).
- Use **Password** mode if API Key is not available.

## Standard build workflow

### 1) Create or open project

Create a fresh project:

```bash
xtool new Hello
cd Hello
```

Generated files include:

- `Package.swift`
- `xtool.yml`
- `.sourcekit-lsp/config.json`

### 2) Build and install to connected device

```bash
xtool dev
```

What `xtool dev` handles:

- Build using SwiftPM iOS cross-compilation.
- Provision/sign package.
- Install app to connected iPhone.

Note: first run can be significantly slower due to cold module compilation; subsequent runs are faster with cache reuse.

Useful `xtool dev` parameters:

- `-c, --configuration <debug|release>`: build configuration (default: `debug`).
- `-u, --udid <udid>`: target a specific device.
- `--usb | --network | --all`: device discovery scope (default: `--all`).

Examples:

```bash
# Build release and deploy to one device
xtool dev run --configuration release --udid <DEVICE_UDID> --usb

# Deploy using network-discovered devices
xtool dev run --network
```

### 3) Iterate

- Edit code.
- Re-run `xtool dev`.
- Validate behavior on device.

## Required project structure

At minimum:

- SwiftPM manifest: `Package.swift`
- xtool control file: `xtool.yml`

Minimal `xtool.yml`:

```yaml
version: 1
bundleID: com.example.Hello
```

## `xtool.yml` controls

- `bundleID`: base app bundle identifier.
- `infoPath`: merge/override selected `Info.plist` keys.
- `resources`: copy files into app bundle root.
- `iconPath`: app icon path (PNG, ideally 1024x1024).
- `entitlementsPath`: entitlements plist path.

Example:

```yaml
version: 1
bundleID: com.example.Hello
infoPath: App-Info.plist
iconPath: Icon.png
resources:
  - GoogleServices-Info.plist
entitlementsPath: App.entitlements
```

## App Extensions workflow

For widget/extensions, define main product and extension products in `xtool.yml`:

```yaml
version: 1
bundleID: com.example.Hello
product: Hello
extensions:
  - product: HelloWidget
    infoPath: HelloWidget-Info.plist
```

## CLI parameters reference

Top-level subcommands (`xtool --help`):

- Configuration: `setup`, `auth`, `sdk`
- Development: `new`, `dev`, `ds`
- Device: `devices`, `install`, `uninstall`, `launch`

### `xtool new`

- Usage: `xtool new [<name>] [--skip-setup]`
- `<name>`: project name.
- `--skip-setup`: skip automatic `xtool setup` before project generation.

### `xtool setup`

- Usage: `xtool setup`
- Runs auth + SDK setup workflow (equivalent to `xtool auth && xtool sdk`).

### `xtool auth login`

- Usage: `xtool auth login [--username <username>] [--password <password>] [--mode <key|password>]`
- `-u, --username`: Apple ID.
- `-p, --password`: password for password mode.
- `-m, --mode <key|password>`: authentication mode.

### `xtool sdk install`

- Usage: `xtool sdk install <path>`
- `<path>`: path to `Xcode.xip` or `Xcode.app`.

### `xtool devices`

- Usage: `xtool devices [--usb] [--network] [--all] [--wait] [--no-wait]`
- `--usb | --network | --all`: connection search mode (default: `--all`).
- `--wait | --no-wait`: wait for a device if none is found (default: `--wait`).

### `xtool install`

- Usage: `xtool install [--udid <udid>] [--usb] [--network] [--all] <path>`
- `<path>`: local app/ipa path.
- `-u, --udid`: install to a specific device.

### `xtool uninstall`

- Usage: `xtool uninstall [--udid <udid>] [--usb] [--network] [--all] <bundle-id>`
- `<bundle-id>`: app identifier to remove.

### `xtool launch`

- Usage: `xtool launch [--udid <udid>] [--usb] [--network] [--all] <bundle-id> [<arg> ...]`
- `<bundle-id>`: app identifier to launch.
- `[<arg> ...]`: launch arguments passed to the app.

### Global options

- `--version`: print version.
- `-h, --help`: show help.

## Troubleshooting checklist

- Device trust prompt appeared and install failed:
  - Accept trust on device, then rerun `xtool dev`.
- Developer Mode disabled:
  - Enable Developer Mode on iOS device and retry.
- "Untrusted Developer" on launch:
  - Trust profile in iOS Settings, then relaunch app.
- Device not detected in Linux/WSL:
  - Confirm USB passthrough/binding and run `ideviceinfo`.
- Entitlements not applied:
  - Verify capability support and account limitations.

## Build output inspection

After build/install, inspect packaged app in:

- `./xtool/<AppName>.app`

Use this to verify merged `Info.plist`, copied resources, and expected bundle contents.

## References

- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/
- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/installation-linux/
- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/installation-macos/
- https://xtool.sh/tutorials/xtool/first-app/
- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/control/
- https://xtool.sh/documentation/xtool/appex/
- Local runtime help output from:
  - `xtool --help`
  - `xtool dev --help`
  - `xtool setup --help`
  - `xtool new --help`
  - `xtool auth --help`
  - `xtool sdk --help`
  - `xtool devices --help`
  - `xtool install --help`
  - `xtool uninstall --help`
  - `xtool launch --help`
